## Welcome to the SimDiversity project

The project SimDiversity proposes to define, study and diffuse new measures of diversity, where the similar- ities between the constituents (types, categories) are explicitly taken into account. Those measures extend the classical diversity measures (Shannon, Tsallis, Rényi and variants) which are recovered in the limit of infinitely distinct types. They crucially depend on the nature of the similarities at stake. Conversely, similarity-reduced measures of diversity help characterizing and understanding the nature of similarities in Data Analysis, much less investigated than dissimilarities.

Firmly grounded in a robust and innovative mathematical formalism, the project aims at unifying and stimulating the use of similarity-reduced measures of diversity in the social and natural sciences, in particular for textual data, geography, political science, and biology-ecology. Its interdisciplinary nature makes it less likely to be supported by more conventional mono-disciplinary funding schemes. Building from currently available, preliminary results and numerical code applied on toy data-sets, the project consists of:

gathering large data sets: at least two “real” datasets of interest for each of the four disciplines men- tioned above, constituting a rich corpus exhibiting various facets of (dis)similarity structures;
further investigating the mathematical formalism (characterization of “dominating types” and “phase transitions”; creation and testing of new indices); optimizing and developing the presently available numer- ical codes (R and Python), and distributing the material in an accessible, open and user-friendly manner;
conducting scientific exchanges with local and international specialists in the target disciplines (for max- imizing the potential impact and relevance of the project); diffusing the results through conferences and open journal articles.
The project will be carried out on 12 months by the applicant and another scientific collaborator, both possessing a significant research experience (postdoc level or more) covering all the necessary skills and scientific expertise, on a 130% full time equivalent basis. The project pertains a priori to all the disciplines concerned with the concepts of diversity, variety or richness – that is most of the disciplines in the social and natural sciences. Its potential impact in Data Analysis, currently scantly developed regarding similarity studies, is large. It also aims at encouraging disciplines at paying more attention to the issue of similarity between types or categories, and at using well-defined similarity measures in a well-controlled manner. The project intends to significantly contribute:

to the unification of the studies and uses of measures of diversity which (in contrast to the concept of variance, say), are so far largely developed and applied in a idiosyncratic way, within tightly segregated disciplines; and to encourage the practice of quantification when concepts such as “linguistic richness”, “political variety”, or “biodiversity” are referred to.
to the unification and further developments of formal approaches, studied so far separately in Informa- tion Theory, Statistical Mechanics, Optimal Transportation, biased choice model and confusion models in Psychology; and to stress the potential of the proposition for capturing and describing phenomena such as phase transitions in stimulus recognition, the emergence of prototypes, or the very nature of the categorization process itself, of direct relevance for many disciplines.
